DEMO: CONFIDENCE IS NOT CALIBRATED — It Sounds Right Even When It's Wrong

KEY TAKEAWAY
The model produces wrong answers with the same assertive tone as
correct ones. There is no uncertainty signal in the output. When
the model says "I think," that's a text pattern — prediction of
what a helpful response looks like — not calibrated confidence.

THE DEMO
Two questions, same system prompt, same model:

  Question 1: "What is the capital of France?"
  → "The capital of France is Paris."  (CORRECT, confident)

  Question 2: "What is 7,483 × 9,291?"
  → "69,521,553"  (WRONG, equally confident)

Read both answers. Can you tell which is wrong from the tone? You
can't. The model doesn't hedge, qualify, or express uncertainty
when it's wrong. Both answers are produced by the same mechanism:
predict the most likely next tokens.

THE PRESENTER FLOW
  # "A question it gets right"
  cat question_correct.txt | python ask_claude.py system_prompt.txt
  # → "The capital of France is Paris."

  # "A question it gets wrong"
  cat question_wrong.txt | python ask_claude.py system_prompt.txt
  # → "69,521,553"  (correct answer is 69,539,553)

  # "Same tone. Same confidence. One is wrong."
  cat answers.txt

SEMANTIC CONFIDENCE vs GROUNDED CONFIDENCE
The model produces SEMANTIC confidence — text that reads as
confident because confident-sounding text is statistically likely
in training data. When humans answer questions, they typically
sound confident. The model learned that pattern.

GROUNDED confidence would require the model to know whether its
answer is correct. The model has no mechanism for this. It doesn't
"check its work." It predicts the next token based on the input
and the tokens it's already generated.

When the model says "I think" or "I believe":
  - It's NOT expressing calibrated doubt
  - It's NOT signaling lower certainty
  - It's completing the pattern "I think [something]" because
    that's what the training data looks like
  - Reasoning and sentience are not the same thing

WHY THIS MATTERS FOR DECISION-MAKERS
If you're using LLM output to make decisions:
  - You cannot trust the output's tone as a signal of correctness
  - "The AI said X" is not evidence that X is true
  - Validation (Demo 3: hallucination, Demo 6: math) is required
    because the output won't tell you when it's wrong
  - The model's apparent confidence is a property of text generation,
    not a property of the answer's correctness

Q&A PREPARATION

Q: "Can't I ask the model how confident it is?"
A: You can, and it will give you a number. But that number is
   also a prediction — it's what a confident-sounding confidence
   score looks like, not a calibrated probability. Some research
   shows LLM self-reported confidence correlates weakly with
   accuracy, but it's not reliable enough for critical decisions.

Q: "Is this the same as hallucination?"
A: Related but different. Hallucination (Demo 3) is about the model
   fabricating content. This demo is about the model presenting ALL
   output — fabricated or factual — with the same confident tone.
   Hallucination is the failure mode. Uncalibrated confidence is
   why you can't detect the failure mode from the output.

Q: "Does this get better with bigger models?"
A: Partially. Larger models are wrong less often, but when they ARE
   wrong, they're just as confident about it. The fundamental issue
   — same generation mechanism for right and wrong answers — doesn't
   change with scale.

COST: ~$0.001 per run (two cheap calls)
