DEMO: STATELESSNESS — Every Call Starts From Zero

KEY TAKEAWAY
The model has no memory between API calls. Each call is independent.
What you experience as "memory" in a chat interface is your framework
re-sending the conversation history as part of the input.

THE DEMO
Two separate API calls:
  Call 1: "My project's code name is AURORA. Acknowledge."
  Call 2: "What is my project's code name?"

The model acknowledges AURORA in call 1. In call 2, it has no idea.
It's not that it forgot — it never knew. Call 2 is a completely
independent function invocation with no connection to call 1.

THE PRESENTER FLOW
  # "Tell the model something"
  cat call1.txt | python scripts/ask_claude.py system_prompt.txt
  # → "I acknowledge... AURORA"

  # "Now ask about it in a NEW call"
  cat call2.txt | python scripts/ask_claude.py system_prompt.txt
  # → "I don't have any information about your project"

  # The model doesn't know. It NEVER knew in this call.

WHY THIS MATTERS
People assume the model "learns" from their interactions. It doesn't.
The model weights are frozen. Each API call receives:
  - The system prompt
  - The messages you send
  - Nothing else

If you want the model to "remember" something, YOU must include it
in the input. This is why context window management matters — the
context window is the ONLY memory the model has. When messages are
evicted from the context (because it's full), that knowledge is gone.

For agents, this means:
  - Conversation history is YOUR responsibility
  - The agent doesn't "build understanding" over turns — it re-reads
    the entire conversation every turn
  - If you truncate history to save tokens, the agent loses context
  - There is no "background knowledge" accumulating — everything
    the agent knows is in the current context window

CONNECTION TO OTHER DEMOS
  - Context pollution (Demo 8/11): noise in the context hurts because
    the context IS the only memory. Garbage in the memory = garbage
    reasoning.
  - Error translation (Demo 9/12): cleaning what goes into context
    matters because it's the only memory the model has to work with.

Q&A PREPARATION

Q: "But ChatGPT remembers things across conversations?"
A: That's a product feature, not a model feature. The application
   stores your conversation and re-sends it. Some apps also store
   a "memory" summary that gets prepended to new conversations.
   The model itself is stateless every time.

Q: "What about fine-tuning?"
A: Fine-tuning changes the model weights — that's a different
   concept. It happens during training, not at inference time.
   A fine-tuned model has different weights, but it's still
   stateless at inference. Each call still starts from zero.

Q: "Does this mean RAG is just putting things in the context?"
A: Exactly. RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) retrieves relevant
   documents and puts them in the context window. The model doesn't
   "access a database" — your code retrieves data and includes it
   in the input. Same stateless call, just with more input.

COST: ~$0.001 per run (two cheap calls)
