KEY TAKEAWAY
Reinforcement Learning doesn't teach the model new facts. It
reshapes which patterns the model prefers. Same weights, same
knowledge, different tendencies. The model before RL and after RL
are the same "person" with different habits.

BACKGROUND
B05 and B06 showed how reward signals train the model. B07 zooms
out to show the result: what does RL actually change?

Pre-training (B02) built a model that writes generic camp letters.
It knows all the patterns — friendship, homesickness, adventure,
food, growth. RL didn't add new patterns. It made certain patterns
more likely to fire.

Think of the pre-trained model as a pinball machine (the "Plinko
board"). The pegs are set by pre-training — they represent what
the model knows about language. RL doesn't add new pegs. It tilts
the board so the ball is more likely to fall through certain
channels.

This demo shows the before and after: same model, same prompt,
different output distribution. The audience sees that RL is about
PREFERENCE, not KNOWLEDGE.

This is the foundation for understanding RLHF (Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback), which is what turns a raw language
model into an assistant that's helpful, harmless, and honest.
Pre-training gives it language. RLHF gives it manners.

THE DEMO
1. Generate 10 letters from the pre-trained model (before RL)
2. Categorize them: how many mention friends, adventure, food, etc.
3. Show the RL-trained model (from B06) generating 10 letters
4. Categorize those: friendship theme is now dominant
5. Same prompt, same model architecture, different distribution
6. Show what DIDN'T change: letter structure, grammar, names

PRESENTER FLOW

Step 1: Generate a batch from the pre-trained model.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --count 10 --model pretrained

Show the distribution. Maybe 2 mention friends, 2 mention food,
2 are adventure, 1 homesick, 3 generic. Roughly uniform across
themes because the training data has equal representation.

Step 2: Generate a batch from the RL-trained model.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --count 10 --model rl

Show the distribution. Maybe 7 mention friends, 1 food, 1
adventure, 1 generic. The friendship theme dominates.

Step 3: Side-by-side comparison.
Pick one pre-trained letter and one RL-trained letter. Point out:

What CHANGED:
  - Topic focus (generic → friendship-heavy)
  - Word choice ("the lake" → "Kai and I at the lake")
  - Emotional tone (neutral → warm/connected)

What DIDN'T change:
  - Letter structure (Dear Mom ... Love, Name)
  - Grammar and spelling
  - Character names from the corpus
  - Sentence length and style

The model didn't learn new facts. It learned to prefer certain
patterns over others.

Step 4: The "tilted board" visualization.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --topic-distribution --compare

Show a bar chart (or ASCII bars) of topic frequencies:

  Pre-trained:  adventure ████  friendship ██  food ███  homesick ██  growth ██
  After RL:     adventure █    friendship ████████  food █  homesick █  growth █

Same total output. Different distribution. The board was tilted.

Step 5: Try a different reward.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --train --reward adventure --steps 100
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --count 5

Now the model writes adventure-heavy letters. The friendship bias
is gone. Different reward, different tilt, same underlying model.

The audience sees: RL is a knob. The pre-trained model is the
instrument. RL decides which notes it plays more often.

WHY THIS MATTERS
This is the mechanism behind every "aligned" AI model:

1. Pre-train on internet text → model knows everything, has no
   preferences, no safety, no helpfulness. Raw prediction engine.

2. RLHF (or RLAIF) → tilt the board toward helpful, harmless,
   honest outputs. Same knowledge, different preferences.

3. The safety implications: RL doesn't REMOVE dangerous knowledge.
   It makes dangerous outputs less probable. With enough prompting
   (jailbreaks), you can sometimes "un-tilt" the board and access
   patterns the model was trained away from. The knowledge is still
   in the weights — it's just been de-prioritized.

This connects to Pillar 2:
- Injection (Demo 02): works partly because the injected text
  can shift the model's "preferred" patterns back toward behaviors
  that RL suppressed.
- Confidence (Demo 04): the model's confidence comes from
  pre-training patterns. RL reshapes which patterns fire but
  doesn't make the model more calibrated about uncertainty.
- Extended thinking: the model was RL-trained so that producing
  reasoning tokens before answering gets rewarded. It's the same
  mechanism as our friendship reward — just applied to reasoning
  patterns instead of friendship patterns.

The "and, and, and" insight: none of these layers replaced the
previous one. Pre-training AND RL AND extended thinking AND tool
use AND evaluation. Each layer assumes everything below it works.
Attention didn't obsolete symbolic reasoning — it created a
substrate where reasoning patterns could emerge statistically.
RL didn't replace pre-training — it shaped which of the learned
patterns get expressed.

Q&A PREPARATION

Q: "If RL just tilts preferences, can't you 'un-tilt' it?"
A: In principle, yes. This is what jailbreaks attempt. The
   pre-trained knowledge still exists in the weights — RL just
   made certain outputs less probable, not impossible. This is an
   active area of safety research.

Q: "Is this why fine-tuning on bad data is dangerous?"
A: Exactly. If someone fine-tunes (a form of RL) on harmful data,
   they can tilt the board toward dangerous patterns. The base
   model already knows how to produce harmful text — fine-tuning
   just makes it prefer to.

Q: "How is this different from just adding words to the prompt?"
A: Prompting is softwiring — temporary influence through the
   context window. RL is hardwiring — permanent changes to the
   weights. A prompt can suggest friendship, but the model might
   ignore it. After RL, the model's default tendency IS friendship.

Q: "Could you RL a model to be worse?"
A: Yes. If the reward function is bad, the model degrades. This is
   called "reward hacking" — the model finds a shortcut that
   maximizes the reward without actually achieving the goal. Our
   B05 outcome reward showed a mild version: the model learned to
   shoehorn the word "friend" rather than write naturally about
   friendship.

COST
$0.00 — no API calls, runs locally.

DEPENDENCIES
PyTorch. Uses both the B02 pre-trained model and the B05/B06
RL-trained models.

SCRIPT NEEDED
Same scripts/rl_demo.py — adds:
  --model pretrained|rl    Select which model to generate from
  --topic-distribution     Count topics in generated output
  --compare                Overlay pre/post distributions
  --reward THEME           Train with a different reward theme
