KEY TAKEAWAY
Attention is the mechanism that lets every token see every other
token. It solves the "bag of words" problem — without it, the model
can't tell "The dog bit the man" from "The man bit the dog."

BACKGROUND
B02 used an LSTM, which processes tokens one at a time in order.
This works but has a bottleneck: information from the start of a
long sequence has to pass through every intermediate step to reach
the end. By the time it arrives, it's degraded.

Attention (Vaswani et al., 2017 — "Attention Is All You Need") takes
a different approach: every token can look directly at every other
token. No bottleneck. Token 500 can attend to Token 1 as easily as
Token 499.

The mechanism uses three projections of each token:
  Query (Q):  "What am I looking for?"
  Key (K):    "What information do I contain?"
  Value (V):  "If I'm relevant, here is my content."

The dot product of Q and K determines how much attention to pay.
High dot product = high relevance = high attention weight. The
output is a weighted sum of the Values.

The "causal" mask: in generation, token N cannot see tokens after
it. This prevents "cheating" — the model can't look at the answer
while predicting it. Implemented as a lower-triangular matrix of
ones.

Multi-head attention: instead of one attention calculation, the
model runs several in parallel (n_head). Think of it as clones at
a party — Head 1 listens for names, Head 2 for emotional tone,
Head 3 for sentence structure. The model combines all heads for a
richer understanding. The "resolution" of each head's listening is
controlled by n_embd (the embedding dimension) — 128 is grainy,
1024 is high-definition.

THE DEMO
This demo visualizes attention weights on short camp-letter phrases
to show which tokens attend to which.

1. Show "bank" example: same word, different meaning based on context
2. Show attention weights on a camp letter phrase
3. Show how the causal mask prevents looking ahead

PRESENTER FLOW

Step 1: The "bank" problem (conceptual, no code).
Show two sentences:
  "I went to the bank to deposit money."
  "I sat on the river bank and watched the water."

Ask: "When the word 'bank' first enters the model as a token, its
vector is identical in both sentences. How does the model know
which meaning to use?"

Answer: Attention. The model looks at surrounding tokens — "money"
pulls the bank vector toward financial meaning, "river" pulls it
toward geographical meaning. By the time the vector exits the
attention layer, it's been updated to reflect the correct sense.

Step 2: Visualize attention on a camp letter phrase.
  python scripts/attention_viz.py "Dear Mom I miss you so much"

Output: a matrix showing attention weights. Each row is a token
looking at every other token. High weights are highlighted.

Point out: "miss" likely attends strongly to "Mom" and "you."
"Dear" attends to "Mom" (it's a greeting pattern). "so" attends
to "much" (common collocation).

Step 3: The causal mask.
  python scripts/attention_viz.py "Dear Mom I miss" --show-mask

Show the triangular mask: "Dear" can only see itself. "Mom" can
see "Dear" and itself. "I" can see "Dear," "Mom," and itself.
Each token only sees what came before it.

Ask: "Why?" Because during generation, the model predicts one
token at a time. When predicting what comes after "miss," it
shouldn't be able to see the answer.

Step 4: Multi-head comparison.
  python scripts/attention_viz.py "Dear Mom I really miss you and Dad" --heads

Show different attention heads attending to different patterns.
One head might focus on "Mom" and "Dad" (names). Another might
focus on "miss" and "really" (sentiment). The model combines
these perspectives.

WHY THIS MATTERS
Attention is why the context window matters so much. Every token
attends to every other token — that's O(n^2) compute. Double
the context window, quadruple the attention cost.

This is also why prompt position matters (Demo 05 in Pillar 2).
Tokens at different positions get different attention weights.
Information at the start and end of the context window tends to
get more attention than information in the middle (though this
varies by model and has been largely mitigated in current Claude).

The causal mask is architecturally identical to why injection
works (Demo 02): there's no structural boundary between "system
prompt" and "user input." They're all just tokens in a sequence,
and the attention mechanism treats them all the same way.

Q&A PREPARATION

Q: "This looks like just matrix multiplication."
A: It is. The entire attention mechanism is matrix multiply, mask,
   softmax, matrix multiply. No symbolic reasoning, no rules.
   Patterns in the weights determine what attends to what.

Q: "Why is this better than what B02's LSTM does?"
A: The LSTM processes tokens in order — information degrades over
   long distances. Attention lets any token attend directly to any
   other token. Token 1000 can "see" Token 1 just as clearly as
   Token 999.

Q: "Is this what people mean by 'Transformer'?"
A: Yes. The Transformer architecture is essentially: attention
   (tokens communicate) + MLP (each token processes what it
   learned) + residual connections (gradients flow freely) +
   layer norm (keep numbers stable). Stack that 12-96 times.
   That's a Transformer. Karpathy's microgpt.py implements the
   full thing in ~100 lines.

COST
$0.00 — no API calls, runs locally.

DEPENDENCIES
PyTorch. May need a small transformer model (not the LSTM from B02)
or a pre-built visualization using Karpathy-style attention code.

SCRIPT NEEDED
scripts/attention_viz.py — visualize attention weights on short
text sequences. Needs:
  --heads       Show per-head attention patterns
  --show-mask   Overlay the causal mask
Output: ASCII or terminal-colored attention matrix.
