KEY TAKEAWAY
Process reward scores each step, not just the final output. The model
learns faster from the same data because each signal tells it exactly
where the output went right or wrong.

BACKGROUND
B05 showed outcome-only reward: generate the full letter, score
pass/fail at the end. Slow convergence, noisy curve. The model has
to guess what worked.

Process reward is the fix. Instead of scoring the complete output,
score each sentence (or segment). "Did this sentence contribute to
the friendship theme?" gives the model precise, local feedback.

A wrong sentence gets corrective signal AT that sentence, not at
the end. The model can explore more aggressively because the cost
of a wrong sentence is local, not global. A bad sentence doesn't
invalidate the whole letter.

The same training data, the same reward goal, but radically more
information per example. Fewer training steps, faster convergence,
better output quality.

This is the insight that made DeepSeek R1 competitive with models
trained at 10-40x the cost. They focused on domains where precise
reward signals are cheap to produce (math, code — where each step
can be verified automatically). Less data, less compute, but each
training step does more work because the signal is clean.

THE DEMO
1. Reset to the same pre-trained model as B05
2. Define the same goal: "letters that mention making friends"
3. Run RL training with process reward (per-sentence scoring)
4. Show the loss curve — faster convergence, less noise
5. Side-by-side comparison with B05's curve
6. Generate — output is more natural than B05's

PRESENTER FLOW

Step 1: Reset to pre-trained baseline.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --count 3

Same starting point as B05. Generic camp letters.

Step 2: Define the process reward function.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --show-reward process

Display the reward function:
  "Score each sentence independently:
   1.0 if the sentence mentions friendship/togetherness
   0.5 if the sentence is neutral but coherent
   0.0 if the sentence is incoherent or off-topic"

Point out the difference: B05 scored the whole letter once.
This scores every sentence. The model knows WHICH sentences
helped and which didn't.

Step 3: Run RL training with process reward.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --train --reward process --steps 200

Show the reward curve: starts at the same level as B05 (~0.2),
but climbs faster and smoother. After 200 steps, reward is
higher than B05's (~0.7-0.8 vs 0.5-0.6).

Step 4: Side-by-side curves.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --show-curve --compare

Display both curves overlaid:
  - Outcome (B05): slow, noisy, lower plateau
  - Process (B06): fast, smooth, higher plateau

Same data. Same goal. Same number of training steps. The only
difference is the quality of the feedback signal.

Step 5: Generate after process RL.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --count 5

Letters mention friends more naturally. The friendship themes are
woven in rather than shoehorned. The model learned "write about
friendship" not just "include the word friend."

Step 6: Compare outputs.
Show a B05 output and a B06 output side by side. B05 might have
"The food was OK. I have a friend." B06 might have "Kai and I
spent the whole afternoon at the lake together." The quality gap
comes from the quality of the feedback, not the amount of training.

WHY THIS MATTERS
This is the core insight behind modern "reasoning" models (o1,
DeepSeek-R1, Claude with extended thinking). They're trained with
reward signals that score intermediate reasoning steps, not just
final answers.

Process reward models (PRMs) score each step of a math proof,
each line of code, each reasoning move. The model learns to think
step-by-step because that's what gets rewarded at each step.

The Dweck parallel (talking point, not a demo):
- Outcome reward = fixed-mindset feedback: "You got an F."
  The student doesn't know what to fix. Develops superstitions.
  Avoids hard problems because failure is identity-level.
- Process reward = growth-mindset feedback: "Your thesis was strong
  but paragraph 3's evidence didn't support it." The student knows
  exactly what to improve. Can take risks because a wrong step
  gets local correction, not blanket punishment.

Dweck found this in classrooms; DeepSeek exploited it in GPU
clusters. Same efficiency gap: process feedback is higher-bandwidth
signal per training example.

Connection to Pillar 3 (evaluation): when you build golden datasets
for agent regression testing, scoring each step (not just the final
answer) catches failures that pass/fail misses. An agent that gets
the right answer through flawed reasoning will eventually fail.
Process evaluation catches it before it does.

Q&A PREPARATION

Q: "Why doesn't everyone use process reward?"
A: It's expensive to define. For math and code, each step can be
   verified automatically (run the code, check the proof). For
   open-ended text (write a poem, draft a policy), defining what
   makes each sentence "good" requires human judgment or a second
   model (LLM-as-judge). The cost of creating the reward signal
   has to be worth the faster convergence.

Q: "Is this how Claude's extended thinking works?"
A: The general approach is similar — the model is trained so that
   producing reasoning steps before answering leads to reward.
   Specific implementation details vary by provider.

Q: "How does this connect to the DeepSeek cost disruption?"
A: DeepSeek focused on domains where process reward is cheap to
   produce (math, code). They got comparable model quality with
   a fraction of the compute because each training step did more
   work. The conventional wisdom was "more compute = better model."
   DeepSeek showed "better feedback = comparable model, less
   compute."

COST
$0.00 — no API calls, runs locally.

DEPENDENCIES
PyTorch. Uses the B02 pre-trained model as starting point.

SCRIPT NEEDED
Same scripts/rl_demo.py as B05 — the --reward flag selects
outcome vs process. The --compare flag overlays both curves.
