DEMO 5: THINKING ALOUD — Watch the Model Reason

KEY TAKEAWAY
The model is not a black box. With extended thinking enabled, you can
watch its reasoning process in real time. It doesn't "know" things —
it predicts, reasons about what it has, and fills gaps. Watching this
process demystifies how the model makes decisions.

BACKGROUND
When you use an LLM through a chat interface, you see the final
output. The model appears to "just know" the answer. But internally,
the model is reasoning through a chain of predictions — considering
options, evaluating what it knows, and deciding what to output.

Extended thinking makes this visible. The model's internal reasoning
is returned as a separate block before the final response. The
audience literally watches the model think.

THE DEMO
We give the model an urgent task — "restart the database server in
rack 7" — but no tools and no inventory. The model has to figure
out what to do with incomplete information. With --thinking enabled,
the audience watches it:

1. Acknowledge it doesn't have access to inventory systems
2. Reason about what a server ID might look like
3. Consider whether to fabricate an ID or say it can't help
4. Make a decision and justify it

This connects directly to Demo 2 (Hallucination). The audience has
already seen the model fabricate a server ID. Now they get to watch
the reasoning that PRODUCED the fabrication.

HOW THE THINKING BUDGET WORKS
Extended thinking is controlled by a token budget. The API call
includes a budget_tokens parameter — this is the maximum number of
tokens the model can spend on its internal reasoning before it has
to produce a final answer.

  --thinking         Default budget (5000 tokens)
  --thinking 500     Minimal budget — terse, fast reasoning
  --thinking 10000   Generous budget — thorough, detailed reasoning

The model may use less than the budget, but it cannot exceed it.
If the budget is too small, the model's reasoning gets cut short
and it may jump to conclusions or skip steps. If the budget is
generous, the model explores more possibilities, considers edge
cases, and reasons more carefully.

Thinking tokens are billed at the OUTPUT token rate for the model.
This means thinking is not free — a 10,000-token thinking budget
on Haiku costs ~$0.05, on Opus ~$0.25. The cost is proportional
to how much you let the model think.

This is the tradeoff: more thinking = more thorough reasoning =
higher cost. In production, you tune the budget to the complexity
of the task. For a simple lookup, 500 tokens of thinking is overkill.
For a complex analysis with ambiguous inputs, 10,000 tokens may be
justified.

COMMON MISCONCEPTION: "PLEASE THINK HARD ABOUT THIS"
People write "think deeply" or "think carefully about this" in their
prompts, believing it makes the model reason better. This is a
misunderstanding of the mechanism.

"Think hard" in a prompt is just more input tokens. It might slightly
shift the probability distribution toward more thoughtful-sounding
output (because training data pairs "think carefully" with longer,
more considered responses). But it doesn't allocate more compute
or give the model more reasoning capacity.

Extended thinking (--thinking) actually allocates a token budget
for internal reasoning. The model gets dedicated space to reason
BEFORE producing its response. This is a structural change to the
inference — more compute, more tokens, more reasoning steps.

  "Please think hard"    → different input tokens, same compute
  --thinking 5000        → same input tokens, MORE compute

The demo makes this concrete: run the same task with "please think
carefully" in the prompt (no --thinking) vs with --thinking enabled.
The thinking version shows actual reasoning. The "please think"
version just sounds more thoughtful.

THE PRESENTER FLOW
  # "Without thinking — just the output"
  cat $V/task.txt | python ask_claude.py $V/system_prompt.txt

  # "Now with thinking — watch the reasoning"
  cat $V/task.txt | python ask_claude.py $V/system_prompt.txt --thinking

  # "Minimal budget — the model has to think fast"
  cat $V/task.txt | python ask_claude.py $V/system_prompt.txt --thinking 500

  # "Generous budget — the model reasons thoroughly"
  cat $V/task.txt | python ask_claude.py $V/system_prompt.txt --thinking 10000

  # "Same question, different model — compare how they reason"
  cat $V/task.txt | python ask_claude.py $V/system_prompt.txt --thinking --model claude-sonnet-4-6

THE CROSS-MODEL COMPARISON
Different models reason differently about the same problem:
  - Haiku: faster, shorter reasoning chains, may fabricate more readily
  - Sonnet: longer reasoning, more likely to acknowledge uncertainty
  - Opus: most thorough reasoning, but also most expensive

The audience sees that model size affects HOW the model reasons,
not WHETHER it reasons. All models go through the same process —
larger models just have more capacity for nuance.

Q&A PREPARATION

Q: "Is the thinking block always accurate?"
A: The thinking block shows the model's actual reasoning process,
   but it's still prediction-based. The model can reason itself
   into a wrong conclusion — and you can watch that happen too.
   That's actually more valuable than only seeing correct reasoning.

Q: "Can I use thinking blocks in production?"
A: Yes. They're useful for debugging agent behavior, audit trails,
   and understanding why an agent made a specific decision. The
   tradeoff is cost — thinking tokens count toward your bill.

Q: "Does thinking make the model more accurate?"
A: Generally yes — chain-of-thought reasoning improves accuracy
   on complex tasks. But it doesn't eliminate hallucination (Demo 2)
   or math errors (Demo 3). It just makes the reasoning path visible
   so you can see WHERE things went wrong.

Q: "Why can I see the thinking? Isn't that the model's 'private' reasoning?"
A: There's no privacy here — the model doesn't have internal states
   you can't access. The thinking block is just tokens the model
   generates that are returned separately from the final response.
   It's a feature of the API, not a leak.

Q: "How do I choose the right thinking budget?"
A: Match the budget to the task complexity. Simple factual lookups
   need little or no thinking. Complex analysis with ambiguous inputs
   benefits from a larger budget. You can tune it empirically — run
   the same prompt at different budgets and see where the reasoning
   quality plateaus. In the demo, 500 tokens produces noticeably
   shorter reasoning than 5000, and 10000 doesn't add much beyond
   5000 for this task. The sweet spot depends on the domain.

Q: "Can the model 'plan' in the thinking block — like 'I should read
   this file' or 'I need to call this tool'?"
A: Yes. When an agent has tools available, the thinking block often
   contains planning: "I need to look up the server inventory first,
   then identify the right server, then restart it." This is the
   model's plan-before-action process. The budget constrains how
   much planning the model can do. A tight budget may cause the
   model to skip planning and jump straight to action — which is
   exactly the kind of behavior that leads to fabrication (Demo 2).

COST: ~$0.01-0.05 per run depending on model and budget
