KEY TAKEAWAY
A language model is a machine that predicts what comes next. A bigram
model is the simplest possible version: count word pairs, sample the
next word from those counts. That's it. Everything else is scale.

BACKGROUND
Before showing the audience an LLM, show them the mechanism stripped
to its bones. A bigram model counts how often word B follows word A
in a corpus. "Dear" is followed by "Mom" 68% of the time, "Dad" 24%,
"Mom and" 8%. To generate text, pick a starting word, sample the
next word from its distribution, repeat.

The output is bad. That's the point. The mechanism is visible BECAUSE
it's bad. The audience sees exactly why the model says what it says —
there's no hidden reasoning, no understanding, just conditional
probability. When you scale this mechanism to billions of parameters
and trillions of tokens, the output gets sophisticated enough to
look like thought. But the mechanism never changes.

This is the "shave and a haircut" moment. The audience's brain
completes the pattern the same way the model does. The difference
is scale, not kind.

THE DEMO
1. Show a few camp letters so the audience knows the corpus
2. Run the bigram counter — show the raw probability tables
3. Generate text from the bigram model
4. Point out: it sounds vaguely like a camp letter but it's nonsense
5. Ask: "What's missing?" (Answer: context beyond one word)

The audience should leave thinking: "I understand the mechanism.
It's just counting and sampling. The magic is in the scale."

PRESENTER FLOW

Step 1: Look at a few letters from the corpus.
  cat corpus/camp_letters.d/arrival/001.txt
  cat corpus/camp_letters.d/homesick/003.txt
  cat corpus/camp_letters.d/adventure/002.txt

Step 2: Build the bigram table from the full corpus.
  python corpus/build_corpus.py --stats
  python scripts/bigram.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --table

This prints the top 20 bigram pairs and their probabilities.
Point out: "Dear -> Mom" is high, "Mom -> and" is high,
"Love -> Sophie/Jordan/Lily" shows up. The model learned the
structure of a letter from counting pairs.

Step 3: Generate text from the bigram model.
  python scripts/bigram.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --words 50

Output will be something like:
  "Dear Mom I miss the lake and I was scared but the food
   is the cabin and we did it and Love Jordan"

It's recognizably camp-letter-shaped but incoherent. Point out
specific failures: "the food is the cabin" — the model only sees
one word of context, so "is" can be followed by anything that
ever followed "is" in the corpus.

Step 4: Generate multiple times to show variation.
  python scripts/bigram.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --words 50
  python scripts/bigram.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --words 50

Same model, different output each time. The sampling is stochastic.
This is temperature before we call it temperature.

Step 5: Generate with only one category.
  python corpus/build_corpus.py --categories homesick
  python scripts/bigram.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --words 50

Now the output skews toward "miss," "home," "want." The training
data shaped the predictions. Same mechanism, different data,
different personality. Rebuild the full corpus afterward:
  python corpus/build_corpus.py

WHY THIS MATTERS
This is the conceptual foundation for everything in Pillar 2.

Injection works because the model predicts based on ALL tokens
in its context. It can't distinguish "instruction" from "data"
because both are just tokens with statistical relationships.

Hallucination happens because the model always predicts SOMETHING.
The bigram model will always pick a next word, even when the
sequence has gone off the rails. It can't say "I don't know."

Confidence is uncalibrated because the model's probabilities are
about word co-occurrence, not truth. A high-probability next word
is frequent, not correct.

The connection to real models: a bigram model IS a first-order
Markov chain. Modern LLMs are essentially very high-order Markov
models with learned representations. Same mechanism, more context.
(See Karpathy's microgpt.py for what this looks like at
transformer scale: ~100 lines of real GPT-2 architecture.)

Q&A PREPARATION

Q: "This is trivially simple. Real LLMs are way more complex."
A: The architecture is different (transformers, attention, billions
   of parameters). But the mechanism — predict the next token from
   what came before — is identical. This model sees one word of
   context. GPT-4 sees 128,000 tokens of context. Both are doing
   conditional probability over sequences.

Q: "Why not just show GPT/Claude from the start?"
A: Because you can't see the mechanism when it works well. A bigram
   model fails in ways that expose the machinery. Once you see the
   machinery, you can recognize it in the sophisticated version.

Q: "What's the difference between this and Markov chains?"
A: Nothing. A bigram model IS a first-order Markov chain.

COST
$0.00 — no API calls, runs locally.
