KEY TAKEAWAY
A neural network learns to predict the next character by adjusting
weights until its guesses match the training data. You can watch it
learn. After enough training, it generates text that looks like what
it was trained on. The model doesn't understand camp — it learned
the patterns of camp letters.

BACKGROUND
B01 showed the mechanism: predict what comes next from what came
before. But a bigram model has no memory beyond one word. The output
is garbage because "Dear Mom I" has no more context than "I" alone.

A character-level neural network fixes this. Instead of counting
word pairs, it learns a function that takes a sequence of characters
and outputs a probability distribution over the next character. The
function has parameters (weights) that start random and get adjusted
by training.

Training works like this: show the model "D-e-a-r", ask it to
predict what comes next. The right answer is " " (a space). If the
model says "z" with 99% confidence, it gets a high Penalty Score.
If it says " " with 99% confidence, the penalty is near zero. That
Penalty Score is called "Cross-Entropy Loss" — it's the model's
Wrongness Score. Training is an optimization algorithm tweaking
every parameter to make that score as small as possible across the
entire dataset.

This is the smallest possible version of what a real LLM does.
Same mechanism (predict next token from context), same training
loop (predict, compare, adjust), same result (model generates text
that resembles training data). The difference is scale: characters
instead of tokens, hundreds of parameters instead of billions,
a thousand letters instead of trillions of words.

For reference, Andrej Karpathy's microgpt.py implements the full
GPT-2 architecture in ~100 lines of Python. Our character model
uses a simpler architecture (LSTM vs Transformer) but the training
loop is identical: predict, measure wrongness, adjust weights.

THE DEMO
1. Show the untrained model generating random characters
2. Train for 10 epochs — show the Penalty Score decreasing
3. Generate again — slightly less random
4. Train for 100 epochs — score drops further
5. Generate again — starting to look like words
6. Train for 1000 epochs — score plateaus
7. Generate again — recognizable camp letter structure
8. Point out what it learned and what it can't do

The model should learn: letter structure (Dear/Love), common words,
sentence patterns. It should fail at: long-range coherence, facts,
consistency. Those failures are the same failures real LLMs have,
just more obvious at this scale.

PRESENTER FLOW

Step 1: Build the corpus (if not already built).
  python corpus/build_corpus.py

Step 2: Show what the untrained model produces.
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --reset

Output: random characters. "kq&mBxU)zLn#w..." No structure.
The model knows nothing. Its weights are random. Every character
is equally likely.

Step 3: Train for 10 epochs, show progress.
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --train --epochs 10 --reset

Output shows the Penalty Score (loss) decreasing:
  Epoch  1: loss 4.21
  Epoch  5: loss 3.44
  Epoch 10: loss 2.89

The model is getting less wrong. Its guesses are getting closer to
what actually comes next in camp letters.

Step 4: Generate after 10 epochs.
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate

Still mostly noise, but spaces and common letters appear.
"th e  an d I  m". It learned that spaces exist and some letters
are more common than others. Not words yet, but structure.

Step 5: Train for 100 more epochs.
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --train --epochs 100

Penalty Score drops further.

Step 6: Generate after 110 total epochs.
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate

Word-like structures appear. "Dear Mo" and "the cam" and "Love,"
show up. It learned common sequences. Still not coherent sentences,
but recognizable fragments. It's learning to spell before it can
learn what words mean — same as the Karpathy microgpt demo with
Shakespeare.

Step 7: Train for 1000 more epochs.
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --train --epochs 1000

This is the big jump. On a laptop CPU: under 60 seconds. The
Penalty Score plateaus — the model has learned what it can learn
from this data at this scale.

Step 8: Generate after ~1100 total epochs.
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --chars 300

Output: recognizable camp letter structure.
  "Dear Mom and Dad,

   I went to the lake and the food was fun and I miss
   you. The camp is and we did the cabin. Love, Sophie"

It's camp-letter-shaped. "Dear Mom" at top. "Love," at bottom.
Activities, food, missing home. Structure is right, content is
muddled. It learned PATTERNS, not MEANING.

Step 9: The teaching moment.
Show generated text next to a real letter. Ask:
  "What did the model learn?"   Patterns, structure, common phrases
  "What can't it do?"           Coherent narrative, facts, reasoning
  "What would fix it?"          More parameters, more data, more context

That last answer is the bridge to real LLMs. Same mechanism, bigger
scale, and the patterns become rich enough to look like understanding.

KEY CONCEPT: One character at a time.
Point this out explicitly: the model just did a full pass through
the entire network to produce ONE character. It will do this 300
times to write that paragraph. Every modern LLM works this way.
GPT-4 writing a 500-word essay does 500 separate full-depth passes.
This is called "autoregressive" generation and it's why these models
need so much compute. (KV caching helps — the model doesn't redo
the math for old tokens, just the new one. But the fundamental
mechanism is one-at-a-time.)

WHY THIS MATTERS
This demo makes the training process visible. The audience watches
weights adjust, the Penalty Score decrease, and output improve.
There's no moment where "intelligence" appears — there's a gradual
sharpening of pattern recognition. That's all training is.

Connects to Pillar 2:
- Injection works because the model learned that tokens after
  "Ignore previous instructions" tend to be followed by new
  instructions. Pattern in the training data, not a security flaw.
- Hallucination happens because the model always generates SOMETHING.
  It can't say "I don't have enough context." It always picks the
  highest-probability next character.
- Temperature (B03): the trained model has a probability distribution
  over next characters. Temperature controls how we sample from it.
  Same model, same weights, different sampling = different output.

Q&A PREPARATION

Q: "Real LLMs use tokens, not characters. Does this matter?"
A: Tokens are a more efficient encoding — predict one word/subword
   at a time instead of one character. The mechanism is identical:
   given what came before, predict what comes next.

Q: "How is this different from memorizing the training data?"
A: If the model memorized, it would only produce exact copies.
   Instead it produces new combinations of learned patterns.
   But memorization IS a real concern — if you train this model
   too long on only 1000 letters, it becomes an expensive
   copy-paste machine. That's called overfitting. (Pillar 2 topic.)

Q: "Could you train this on something other than camp letters?"
A: Train on Shakespeare, it writes Shakespeare. Train on Python,
   it writes Python. The model doesn't know what camp is — it knows
   what characters tend to follow what other characters. That's the
   whole trick.

Q: "How long does training take?"
A: On a laptop CPU with 1000 letters: under 60 seconds for 1000
   epochs. A real LLM trains on thousands of GPUs for weeks.
   Same loop (predict, compare, adjust), different scale.

COST
$0.00 — no API calls, runs locally.

DEPENDENCIES
PyTorch (for the neural network). Model is ~80 lines of code.

CHECKPOINT BEHAVIOR
Model saves to corpus/charmodel.pt. Training is incremental — run
--epochs 10, then --epochs 100, and it continues from where it was.
Use --reset to start fresh. This lets the presenter build up
training live during the demo.
