KEY TAKEAWAY
The model is deterministic. It always produces the same probability
distribution for the next character. Temperature changes how we
SAMPLE from that distribution — it's a post-processing knob, not
a property of the model itself.

BACKGROUND
After B02, the audience has watched a model learn. They've seen it
generate camp-letter-shaped text. Now show them the sampling layer.

The model outputs a probability distribution: given "Dear Mo",
the next character might be "m" at 85%, "n" at 8%, "r" at 3%, etc.
Temperature controls how we pick from those probabilities.

Low temperature (0.1): the high probabilities get "sharpened."
"m" at 85% becomes effectively 100%. The model always picks the
most likely character. Output is repetitive but "safe."

Temperature 1.0: the distribution stays as the model calculated it.
You get variety — sometimes "m", occasionally "n."

High temperature (1.5+): the distribution gets "flattened." Lower-
probability options become more likely. Output gets creative but
unstable. Eventually, gibberish.

This is the same concept as Demo 07 in Pillar 2, but here the
audience sees it on a model they built. They understand WHY
temperature works, not just THAT it works.

THE DEMO
1. Generate from the same trained model at temperature 0 (greedy)
2. Generate at temperature 0.5 (conservative)
3. Generate at temperature 1.0 (balanced)
4. Generate at temperature 1.5 (creative/unstable)
5. Side-by-side: same model, same weights, different sampling

PRESENTER FLOW

Prerequisite: B02's model must be trained (checkpoint exists).

Step 1: Temperature 0 (greedy — always pick highest probability).
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --chars 200 --temperature 0.01 --seed 42
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --chars 200 --temperature 0.01 --seed 99

Point out: both outputs are nearly identical regardless of seed.
The model always picks the same next character. Repetitive,
possibly looping. "Dear Mom and Dad, I miss you and I miss you
and I miss you and I miss..."

Step 2: Temperature 0.5 (conservative).
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --chars 200 --temperature 0.5

More varied. Still coherent, fewer loops. The model occasionally
picks the second-most-likely character, creating variety.

Step 3: Temperature 1.0 (as trained).
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --chars 200 --temperature 1.0

This is the "natural" distribution. The output the model was
trained to produce. Mix of common and occasional rare choices.

Step 4: Temperature 1.5 (creative/chaotic).
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --chars 200 --temperature 1.5

Starting to break down. Rare characters appear more often. Spelling
degrades. Structure loosens. The model is "guessing" more.

Step 5: Temperature 2.0+ (noise).
  python scripts/charmodel.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --chars 200 --temperature 2.5

Near-random. The probability distribution is so flat that even
unlikely characters get selected. Back to noise — but structured
noise, not the pure random of an untrained model.

WHY THIS MATTERS
Temperature is the first place where human judgment enters the
generation process. The model provides the math; the operator
decides how to sample from it.

In Pillar 2 (Demo 07), we show temperature on Claude's API. The
audience will already understand the mechanism from this demo.
They'll know that "creative" output isn't smarter — it's less
constrained sampling from the same distribution.

Security implication: temperature affects reproducibility. At
temperature 0, the same prompt always produces the same output.
At temperature 1.0, the same prompt can produce different outputs.
This matters for testing, auditing, and regression.

Q&A PREPARATION

Q: "Is higher temperature 'more creative'?"
A: It's more random. Creativity is a human interpretation of
   unexpected but coherent combinations. High temperature produces
   unexpected combinations, but they're often incoherent. There's
   a sweet spot — usually 0.7-1.0 — where the output is varied
   enough to be interesting without falling apart.

Q: "Where does temperature happen in the code?"
A: After the model outputs logits (raw scores), before we pick the
   token. It's a division: logits / temperature. Lower temperature
   makes high scores relatively higher. Higher temperature makes
   all scores more similar. Then we sample from the adjusted
   distribution.

Q: "Do real models use temperature?"
A: Yes, every major API exposes a temperature parameter. The range
   varies: Claude caps at 0.0-1.0. OpenAI and Gemini allow 0.0-2.0.
   Our character model has no cap — any positive float works — which
   is why we can demo values above 1.0 here to show what extreme
   flattening looks like. Demo 07 in Pillar 2 uses Claude's API,
   so it stays within 0.0-1.0.

COST
$0.00 — no API calls, runs locally.

DEPENDENCIES
PyTorch. Uses B02's trained checkpoint.
