KEY TAKEAWAY
Outcome-only reward tells the model "you were wrong" but not where
or why. The model needs many examples to statistically infer which
patterns work, because each signal tells it almost nothing about
what to fix.

BACKGROUND
B01-B04 covered how a model learns from data (pre-training). This
demo introduces Reinforcement Learning (RL) — how you shape a
trained model's behavior AFTER pre-training.

Pre-training teaches the model to predict text. RL teaches it which
predictions to prefer. The mechanism: define a reward signal, let
the model generate output, score the output, adjust weights toward
higher-scoring patterns.

The reward signal is the feedback that tells the model "good" or
"bad." This demo shows the simplest version: outcome-only reward.
The model generates a complete camp letter, and we score only the
final result. Did the letter mention making friends? Yes = reward.
No = no reward.

The problem: the model doesn't know WHICH part of the letter earned
or lost the reward. Was it the greeting? The middle? The closing?
With only pass/fail on the final output, the model has to guess.
It needs hundreds of examples to statistically figure out which
patterns tend to correlate with reward.

This is like telling a student "you got an F" without marking which
questions they got wrong. They can improve, but slowly, by trying
different things and seeing which attempts get a passing grade.

THE DEMO
1. Show the pre-trained model generating generic camp letters
2. Define a reward: "letter mentions making friends" = 1, else = 0
3. Run RL training with outcome-only reward
4. Show the loss curve — noisy, slow convergence
5. Generate after training — output shifts toward friendship theme
6. Compare convergence speed to B06 (process reward)

PRESENTER FLOW

Step 1: Generate baseline letters (pre-trained, no RL).
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --count 5

Show 5 letters. They're generic camp letters — mix of all themes.
No particular focus on friendship.

Step 2: Define the reward function.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --show-reward outcome

Display the reward function:
  "Score 1.0 if the complete letter contains any of:
   friend, friends, buddy, pal, together, we all, teammate"
  "Score 0.0 otherwise."

Point out: this is outcome-only. The model generates the entire
letter, THEN we check. No intermediate feedback.

Step 3: Run RL training with outcome reward.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --train --reward outcome --steps 200

Show the reward curve: starts low (~0.2), slowly climbs. The curve
is noisy — reward jumps around because the model is guessing which
patterns help. After 200 steps, reward reaches maybe 0.5-0.6.

Step 4: Generate after outcome RL.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --generate --count 5

Letters now mention friends more often, but the improvement is
uneven. Some letters shoehorn friendship mentions awkwardly.
The model learned "include the word 'friend' somewhere" but
not "write naturally about friendship."

Step 5: Show the convergence curve.
  python scripts/rl_demo.py corpus/camp_letters.txt --show-curve

Display the reward over training steps. Point out: noisy, slow
to plateau. The model needed many attempts because each attempt
only told it "right" or "wrong," not "where" or "why."

Save this curve for comparison in B06.

WHY THIS MATTERS
This is how early RLHF (Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback) worked. Human raters scored complete model outputs on
a 1-7 scale. The model got a number but no explanation.

The problem scales: with complex tasks (write a security policy,
diagnose a bug), outcome-only reward is even less informative.
The model can't tell if it got the right answer for the wrong
reasons or the wrong answer despite good reasoning.

Connection to evaluation (Pillar 3): when we score agent outputs
with only pass/fail (golden dataset, final-answer-only), we're
giving the agent the same low-bandwidth feedback. A "passing"
test might hide a flawed reasoning chain that got lucky.

The Dweck parallel: outcome-only reward is fixed-mindset feedback.
"You got an A" or "you failed." No signal about what to change.
The learner develops superstitions about what works, because the
feedback doesn't isolate the actual variable.

Q&A PREPARATION

Q: "Why not just tell the model what to fix?"
A: That's process reward — B06. Here we're showing why outcome-only
   is expensive: you need volume to compensate for imprecision.

Q: "Isn't this how we evaluate people too?"
A: Often, yes. Annual reviews that say "meets expectations" without
   specifics are outcome-only. Research (Dweck, Stanford) shows
   process feedback produces faster improvement in humans too.

Q: "How does this relate to RLHF?"
A: RLHF typically trains a separate "reward model" from human
   preferences (A is better than B), then uses that reward model
   to score outputs. The reward model itself is outcome-based —
   it scores the complete output, not individual steps.

COST
$0.00 — no API calls, runs locally.

DEPENDENCIES
PyTorch. Uses the B02 pre-trained model as starting point.

SCRIPT NEEDED
scripts/rl_demo.py — simplified RL training loop. Needs:
  --train               Run RL training
  --reward outcome|process  Which reward signal to use
  --steps N             Training steps
  --generate            Generate from current model
  --count N             Number of letters to generate
  --show-reward TYPE    Display the reward function
  --show-curve          Display reward-over-time curve
